summary
This is a book written by 2 authors who were served as ex-  S.E.A.L (United States Sea , Air, and Land  )members Jocko Willink and Leif Babin , each chapter tells a story from their time in service, which can be connected in our real life situation,this book mainly focus on building high performing team based on achievement values, so, in the beginning of the book the authour takes us to a situation of war , the SEAL team and Iraqi soldiers were had a conflict between them it was taken place in Ramadi, when the seal team decided to bomb them they felt something wrong, and decided to enter into the building of iraqi soldiers, by the time one of the iraqi soldier entered in to their boundry who was shot down, both of them called for support, but it was later discovered by the author that it was a case of friendly fire (blue on blue), by the time one of the team member got injured and luckily could save him , the author reached out to commander and told him about the situation, and the commander was stunned knowing this, but willink (the author) didnot blame anyone and he took the blame completely by himself as he was the commander, by accepting his mistake he earned respect from his fellow members and his juniors. This is the main principle , they are focussing on how we should take ownership of our own mistake, yes we all do make mistakes and its totally fine as we are human beings and it is a human behaviour,but most of us try to blame our mistakes on others which is totally wrong,in this situation willink could easily blame one of his juniors or his team members as they were ready to take the blame eventhough it was not their mistakes but, as a captain he did what is right for him and his value as a captaincy has increased amoung his team, so, in a business perspective willink had to deal with a companies vice president, the company did not perform well, the vice president had a plan but it did not work that well, so , Mr willink was invited to solve this problem, while having a discussion with the vice president of the company, he found out that he was not being responsible of his mistakes as he blamed his workers for not performing well as per the plan,targets are not being met etc , so the author understood his behaviour, so he had a meeting with the employees from where he found out that the employees didnot understand how the vice president want his idea to be executed, so after the discussion , the author met the vice president of the company and pointed out how he failed to express his idea to his employees and this was his only his mistake, that really shook him up and it was unable to accept by him,but finally he realised his mistake called upon on a meeting and adressed the employees about his mistake.                                                                                          
In the second chapter, as its title suggested there is no bad team,only a bad leader,The members of SEAL team had a training session in water, it was a hell week for them as they had gone through tough trainings, the last training was to row boat to a particular target that they provided, and the members were divided into 6 different groups, Team 1 was performing well as they had a good leader, but team 6 came last almost everytime, as the commander noticed that team 1 was doing well, they decided to switch the leaders of those 2 boats, the leader of boat 1 did not like the idea at first but he had no choice, after switching the leadrs of the boat they found that the state of boat 6 improved way beyond expected, this just happend by replacing the leader, instead of re arranging the whole team, so, this is the basic principle that the author is conveying through this story that there is no bad team, only a bad leader,From the business perspective, Willink had an interaction with a Chief Technology Officer (CTO) whose performance fell below the expected standards. He was good at framing excuses and shifting blame to his juniors. After they had a talk with Willink, he was very reluctant in embracing the concept of extreme ownership. He advised the owners of the company to replace him because he felt the main problem was the CTO. After replacing the CTO, the company began to register improved performance and meeting its targets. The owners of the company contacted Willink to confirm that, indeed, it was not a matter of bad teams but rather bad leadership.                                                                         


In the third chapter,the author starts to question himself, specifically on whether the inclusion of the Iraqi soldiers into the mission will work. He reminisces about the many years his team has worked together, and how it has proved to be a reliable and effective team. They have had many years of training and combat experience that they could anticipate each other’s movement. Willink says that even in the dark, they were able to locate each other’s silhouettes. However, because they had received an order from above to include the Iraqi soldiers in the mission, this created a problem. The author saw this as an unfair directive and wondered whether these two sets of troops will be compatible.- From Willink’s perspective, the Iraqi troops were arguably the worst combat troops in the world; the fact being that most of them joined the army for a paycheck due to the dire economic conditions. The troops were also poorly trained and had no basic war equipment and uniform. In fact, most of them wore sneakers as boots. But, more importantly, the Iraqi soldiers were poorly motivated and trained.The message of including the Iraqi soldiers into the mission was received with great resistance throughout the ranks. The troop saw it as a way of making the mission harder because they believed in their own ability and competency. They also feared the element of mistrust between them and the Iraqi soldiers. On critically thinking about the whole issue and trying to understand the bigger picture, Willink realized that it was not about winning on the military perspective but rather how to make a stable and peaceful country; and if they could not train the Iraqi soldiers to protect their own country, it would mean the need for American soldiers to be deployed into these dangerous lands, and help them protect their own country for generations to come (Wilhite, 2018). Willink realized that there was a reason why the order wanted them to include the Iraqi soldiers in their operation; and the reason was that, maybe, it was time for the Iraqi soldiers to be independent and learn how to protect themselves.
The task that was before Willink was to help his troops understand and believe this revelation. He convened an urgent meeting in an attempt to convince them to believe and understand the directive, in which he was successful. Willink made them realize that if they are not going to teach the Jundhis how to protect themselves, then it meant the troops will never go home; they will have to continue staying around the areas of Ramadi to protect and g
uard the Iraqi citizens,From the business perspective, Willink found himself in a situation where a class of middle level managers complained about the new compensation plan developed by the company’s top management, and argued that the plan will definitely push their salespeople to the competitors. He realized that the middle managers were not candid enough to ask the manager why the plan was being implemented. Instead, they opted to rely on excuses and rumors to complicate the situation. The issue that Willink observed was that the employees understood the plan, but never knew why the plan was being implemented.
  
In the fourth chapter,It  begins by depicting an attack by insurgents on the U.S, outpost, who had ambushed it during the late hours. In return, the U.S. responded to the insurgents, which was characterized as a morning of extreme fires on both sides. It was dawning on Willink that since the beginning of the 3rd deployment in Iraq, the level of sophistication and determination of the insurgents became quite alarming. This was far greater than any resistance the SEALs had encountered in their previous deployments. The Muj had mastered a complex way of conducting attacks on a number of the U.S. outposts located several kilometers away from each other. Despite the determination, the U.S. troops never made it any easier for the insurgents, where they protected themselves behind sandbags and strong concrete walls.After a month of operations in Ramadi, Willink says the teams have mastered the area and discovered strategic places to position themselves when the enemy attacked. The number of insurgents killed under Task Unit Bruiser-grew to unprecedented levels. Willink says that every Iraqi soldier killed meant one more day of survival to U.S. soldiers. It also meant the Iraqi inhabitants were guaranteed another day of peaceful stay. The chapter is centered on the event when the SEALs from Task Unit Bruiser set out to work out with other troops from Camp Corregidor. The ground platoon commander felt inferior because he taught the troops from the American advisors, and the Iraqi soldiers were more trained and equipped than the SEALs from Task Unit Bruiser. He was worried that the guys could be better and possibly take away their mission. Willink found himself between two sides who could not swallow their self-importance and work together as a unit. The group of American advisors clearly stated that they will not take any directives given by the SEAL platoon commander. Willink resorted to calming their egos and engaging them to work closely during the field operations. This was important because the enemy was not within, but rather the insurgents who were lurking in the streets of Ramadi ready to kill and injure innocent individuals.From the business perspective, Willink and Babin were interacting with a guy called Gary; who was complaining that the superintendent working under him had violated the basic operational standards by swapping out a critical piece of equipment. Babin was concerned to know why Gary was overreacting about the whole matter. It seemed that his ego was bruised by the decision of the superintendent not clearing the equipment through him. Willink and Babin helped Gary swallow his ego, which then led to his constructive talk with the superintendent. Even though the superintendent was the one to blame, Gary as a leader had to own it all and accept positive criticism. This would steer a positive communication between him and the superintendent.

In the fifth chapter, the events are  narrated by Babin. The U.S. Army had adopted a radical and innovative strategy to take back Ramadi from the malevolent clutches of the insurgency. They had to go deeper into enemy territory, conquer them, and establish outposts to protect those gained. This was aimed at weakening the enemy and reducing operational boundaries. Integral to this strategy was cordon and search operations, clearing through city blocks house by house. On one particular operation, Team B arranged a large cordon and search operation that spanned several blocks from the heart of their bases, but yielded no results. The teams found themselves deeper inside enemy territory (Yanocruz, 2018). The operation ran almost up to the early hours of the morning and no incident had happened so far. The platoons’ commanders now had to come up with recommendations on whether to continue with the operation, or pull out and go back to their bases.
In the business application, the production manager was complaining about how the workers from a subsidiary owned by the parent company, was slowing down the production process. This was mainly because their jobs were never completed on schedule. The production manager explained to Willink and Babin how the company struggled to minimize downtime in their production. He also explained how downtime scenarios cost the company huge revenues and substantially impacted the bottom line. Babin advised the manager to look at the general organizational mission and stop laying excuses on the workers from the subsidiary company. The overall organizational mission is the one guiding the manager, and not his agendas and ego. He had to own it all and accept that the blame was on him and him alone.


In the sixth chapter,It  starts by describing how a heavy explosion shook the walls that he and a number of his soldier counterparts were occupying. This was just another awakening of how the insurgents were improving and sophisticating their operations. There was a young American soldier in charge of the MiTTs who wanted to take the Iraqi soldiers to patrol the territories of the enemy so that they could test their mettle. Out of his excitement, The MiTT leader had ignored the dangers that he was exposing himself and the troops that were to accompany him. Willink saw it important that the leader present to him a map of how he is going to cover the operation. He assigned a few elements of the SEAL team to accompany him in his mission. Post analysis, Willink found out that the route the MiTT commander was planning to take was quite complex and dangerous, and advised him to take the shortest route possible to minimize the dangers they were exposing themselves.On the business perspective, Willink and Babin advise a manufacturing plant to develop a simple bonus compensation plan, replacing the complex one that was quite hectic for the employees to understand.


In the seventh chapter,The narrator of this chapter is Babin. This is taking place in South-Central Ramadi, Iraq, also known as The Hornet’s Nest. All the elements of SEALs, Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) bomb technicians, and Iraqi soldiers are under attack, and all they could do under such accurate enemy fire was to hit the deck (lay law or close to the ground) and try not to get their heads shot off. Rocket Propelled Grenade (RPG) are being thrown in rapid sequence and exploding with a tremendous concussion against the walls. The fury of the attack then subsides, and the SEAL snipers return fire with devastating effect.Willink, who is the platoon commander, then makes his rounds by checking room after room on the status of his guys, to ascertain that none was hit. He then passes the same report over the radio to the U.S. Army’s TOK. The SEAL platoon then identified a building just up the street from a mosque that frequently rallied the call to jihad from its minaret speakers to the hundreds of well-armed Muj that occupied the area. The building was convenient for its commanding view of the area, where it was located right in the backyard of the enemy. Taking a position in that particular building meant that a honest had been stirred. The plan was to get to where the bad guys would least expect you to be in order to disrupt their program, kill many of their fighters, and decrease their ability to attack nearby U.S. Army and Marine Combat outposts. The fighting intensified and the SEAL snipers engaged and killed many of them, while SEAL machine gunners returned fire into enemy positions,Babin also describes the challenges they faced during departure given that the building had only one entrance and exit.  One of them also leads to the street, the most dangerous street where he lies helplessly and this creates a dilemma. He has to strategize on how they were to get downstairs in time before the explosion of the charge that was detected, and also organize medics to attend to the soldiers on the ground. This is what prioritize and execute was all about, determining the greatest priority, and direct a team to attack the priority.


In the eighth chapter,he setup is in South-Central Ramadi, Iraqi, the operation termed as A Reckonin, and the story is told by Willink. It begins when the SEAL teams receiving information of presence of enemy snipers on top of a building. The narrator, who is also the commander of all the SEALs (over thirty) and their partner forces of Iraqi soldiers, now had to apply the tactic of Decentralized Command. This meant he had to organize all the SEAL officers, including Babin, their platoon chiefs, and senior petty officers, and mandate them with the role of decision-making and execution.
With the deployment of the Task Unit Bruiser to Ramadi, Iraq, and with the application of the Decentralized Command system, each individual learned that they were expected to make decisions. Willink then gives a step-by-step outline of their strategic progress and the challenges faced during the execution of their plan,He describes how the operation began by both the Charlie and Delta Platoons occupying their preselected locations in which they were to carry attacks from. They ensured that many possible enemy ingress and egress routes have been covered, positions that mutually support each other had been set up, and solid fighting positions that could defend them against heavy enemy attack had been picked.Decentralized Command enabled them to coordinate and effectively manage risk, prevent disaster, and accomplish their mission. Just like in military combat, business managers also need to practice mission planning as an integral part in achieving success. Effective lines of communications need be kept and decentralization of duties to junior trustees is critical. The CEO (Chief Executive Officer) should then play the role of coordination and giving a go-ahead in execution activities.


In the nineth chapter,This chapter is set in the Ramadi area, with the described events revolving around the rescuing of a hostage who had been kidnapped by the insurgents. Babin narrates how missions like this are sometimes difficult to execute because of the fact even though they are the enemies to kill, there is also the innocent victim to save. In the recent kidnapping cases that had happened in the area, the terrorists tortured and killed the hostages and, in some cases, they went on to kill them despite the families paying the ransom (Ranade, 2016). The cruelty of the terrorist necessitated Babin and his teams to come up with a plan and instigate as soon as possible.The plan had to be developed from the intelligence the troops were receiving from the teams in charge of this information. They had located the area and confirmed the target was in the enemy controlled area, and thus it would be a bit difficult to save the hostage. Regardless of these dangers, it was still important for the troops to participate in the mission. They developed a plan that was strategic in maximizing the success of the mission, while minimizing the assault and casualties on their part.


In the 10th chapter,The set-up of the story is in Camp Marc Lee, Ramadi, in Iraqi. Babin, the narrator for this chapter, presents us with a flashback of their experiences during their fight with the insurgent. This comes at a time when their troops are preparing to leave. He then highlights instances of some of their guys getting wounded, such as Mike Monsoor, who lost his life in the battle. In a different scenario, Babin reveals to us how he noticed the negative changing attitude of some soldiers, and concludes that it was a failure on his part, as a leader, for not explaining to them effectively and with clarity. He concludes that he would have put together a routine strategic overview brief and regularly deliver the same to the platoon operators so that they could understand the mission to be accomplished, furthering the strategic goals of stabilizing Ramadi and securing the populace. This is the ideal process of leading down the chain. Leading up the chain requires one to tactfully engage with the immediate boss or higher HQ in order to obtain decision and support necessary for the team to accomplish its mission and ultimately win.As a corporate entity, businesses have a number of managers operating from top management directors, senior managers, field managers, etc. Management, therefore, needs to come up with a more effective line of communications that will enable efficient flow of information in order to achieve success. Field managers should be made aware of all that is happening in the HQ, and they should be able to feed forward effectively.


In the eleventh chapter,This chapter is narrated by Babin, and he starts by introducing to us a sniper called Chris Kyle, one of the most experienced snipers on the platoon team. Babin attributes the success of Kyle in the fact that he had embraced extreme ownership of his duty. He was also disciplined and focused on what the mission objectives required. Babin and Kyle are caught in a dilemma of positive identification (PID), or the personal identification of an enemy. Kyle had observed a figure that was moving suspiciously in a room they had identified as A27, and he was worried that the individual belonged to the team of enemy snipers who had previously killed a dozen U.S. soldiers. Babin was also disturbed by this person, of whom they completely failed to identify. As the commander-in- charge, Babin was supposed to give a directive of shooting this enemy sniper dead. Kyle, on his side, felt uncomfortable of shooting this guy, as he had a second thought that, just maybe, the individual in the building was not the enemy. The two almost succumbed to the pressure of the platoon commander who wanted the building cleared because, on his side, it was determined that there was no U.S. soldier in that building.


In the twelveth chapter,this chapter is narrated by Willink, and describes a time in Baghdad, Iraq, when it was their time to determine who they had killed or captured while gather intelligence on the same. Getting evidence was a way of ensuring that cases are developed against those captured or detained. He goes ahead to analyze their past method of collecting evidence, which he refers to as being problematic and non-efficient in that once evidence had been collected, it could not tell who collected it, when it was collected, as well as difficulty ascertaining whether a given room had been cleared or not.Interestingly, the courts in Iraq had evidence indicating the exact room from which the information was retrieved. Willink then reaches out to his Assistant Officer in Charge (AOIC) and requests him to devise the best way in which it could be done in order to comply with the requirements of the courts. At first, the team denied the new evidence brought but Willink took the role of explaining, and asks them if they can give it a trial run. At first, the entire team denies the new changes to be introduced and Willink took the role of explaining the essence to the team and asks them if they can give it a trial. After two successful trials, he led the team in the implementation of the new system while on a mission in Baghdad, a mission where everything was completed within twenty minutes clearing, securing, and searching the target building. This had laid a baseline of solid and disciplined search procedures. Their freedom, therefore, to operate and maneuver had increased substantially through disciplined procedures, thus discipline equals freedom
In business organizations today, managers do find themselves in awkward situations, specifically where they have to become more disciplined to make the toughest decisions and save the “ship and the other men aboard”. These decisions are made with the interest of the entire business at heart, and not for individual benefit. Managers in such situations should be ready to lose friends, but for the sake of the organization.
